# Cultural familiarity analysis

**Author:** Ellen Chumbe

---
    
## Description:

The purpose of this project is to analyze the results of human annotations on a dataset containing prompts and AI generations pairs related to cultural scenarios in different countries and assess whether the generated texts are aligned with the annotators expectations given their cultural context.
    
The dataset used:
- Was published by Google Research at https://research.google/resources/datasets/?&dataset_types=text-annotation
- Can be found at https://github.com/google-research-datasets/cultural_familiarity_annotations/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file, downloading the annotated_data.xlsx file. From that file, the tabs considered relevant for the analysis were: 'Consolidated' and 'Model Key', downloaded as .csv files.
- Was compiled for the paper: https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-short.26/ **[1]**

The initial dataset includes 10 countries (China, Ethiopia, Greece, Indonesia, Iran, Mexico, South Korea, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States), with 10 prompts and 9 annotators per country. The annotators were natives to the country they rated.

The prompts ask about socially acceptable conventions in scenarios such as people eating together, having a gathering, etc. According to the related paper, as of its publishing date (July 2025), LLMs miss some cultural nuances, so researchers generated three texts per each prompt -using only an LLM (Vanilla method), using LLM + RAG (RAG method), and using LLM + web search (Search method)- to assess if any of them achieved better results. Gemini 1.5 was the LLM used for the AI generations. 

---

The project required three sets of tasks:

### 1. Understanding the data
    
**'Consolidated.csv':** Consists of prompts and their related AI generations with scores per country and annotator.
Each row contains the 10 prompts that were evaluated in random order. Each prompt includes 3 texts generated by the different methods (Vanilla, RAG, or Search), the scores assigned to each generation by the corresponding annotator, an identifier for the annotator, and the country to which that annotator belongs.
    
**'Model Key.csv':** Each row contains the same data of the consolidated.csv file, but instead of the scores, it has the method (called 'key') used for generating the response texts.

An initial exploration of the prompts in both files determined they were customized for each country (contained each country name), which made an entensive list of prompts. To explore what were the unique 10 prompts used for each country, I replaced the country names en each prompt with a generic 'COUNTRY' label.
    
I confirmed there were 10 unique countries in the dataset and 9 annotators per country.

### 2. Transforming the data
    
Although the dataset included some explanations about its content in the documentation, it was unclear how the entries were ordered within each row.

After inspecting the files, I confirmed the set of prompts was randomly ordered per annotator, but appeared in the same order in both the 'Consolidated.csv' and 'Model Key.csv' files. The files were loaded as dataframes, and a new dataframe (df_merged) was created by merging by country, prompts, and generations. At this point, I got all prompt-generations, with their corresponding scores and generation methods.

The merge could not be applied to some rows from United States and United Kingdom. After inspecting excerpts of the data of these countries, I observed there were empty generations for those countries and decided to remove them from the analysis.

The last part of the data transformation involved transforming the wide-format df_merged dataframe into a long-format one for easiness in the data manipulation to get the graphs in the next step. For this, I  chose to create a list of dictionaries -called 'rows'- to save "Country", "Annotator#", "Prompt_text", "Generations", "Scores", "Response_keys" and create a final dataframe df_merged_order with that dictionary info.

### 3. Generating graphs

Finally, using matplotlib, I created the following bar charts:

    Average annotated scores per response type
    Average score per country and response type
    Average score per prompt and response type
    
**[1] Citation:**
        @inproceedings{lertvittayakumjorn-etal-2025-towards,
        title = "Towards Geo-Culturally Grounded {LLM} Generations",
        author = "Lertvittayakumjorn, Piyawat  and
        Kinney, David  and
        Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar  and
        Jr., Donald Martin  and
        Dev, Sunipa",
        editor = "Che, Wanxiang  and
        Nabende, Joyce  and
        Shutova, Ekaterina  and
        Pilehvar, Mohammad Taher",
        booktitle = "Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers)",
        month = jul,
        year = "2025",
        address = "Vienna, Austria",
        publisher = "Association for Computational Linguistics",
        url = "https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-short.26/",
        doi = "10.18653/v1/2025.acl-short.26",
        pages = "313--330",
        ISBN = "979-8-89176-252-7"
    }